Add Github Action Guides (#631)
piwik/developer-documentation: docs/tests-github.md

---
category: DevelopInDepth

---
# Using GitHub Actions

[Github Action](https://github.com/features/actions) makes it easy to automate all your software workflows, now with world-class CI/CD. Build, test, and deploy your code right from GitHub. Make code reviews, branch management, and issue triaging work the way you want.

## GitHub Action Scripts

All the GitHub Action build file are locate in `.github/workflows/*.yml`

Each script is triggered by its own conditions, for more details see [Github Action Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)

## Create a new GitHub Action script

To create a new GitHub Action script please read [Quickstart for GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart)

We recommend forking the Matomo project and running actions on your own pipeline first. Also, please check the following list before getting started:

> ### Existing GitHub Action Scripts

Reviewer: here I only meant to move down the sentence `(New scripts should be documented in the list above.)` but not the entire section.

Matomo uses GitHub Action to automatically run its build by various triggers.
- [Build Tracker JS] Trigger by the comment `build js` into the pull request. That will compress js/piwik.js into matomo.js and piwik.js
- [Build VUE] Auto trigger, it will build VUE file and commit back to the PR
- [Composer Update] Auto trigger by cron，it will run `composer update` and commit back to the repo
- [PHPCS check] Auto trigger, checking PHPCS code quality if not valid will return error details.
- [Inactive PR] after 14 days, inactive PR will mark as state

(New scripts should be documented in the list above.)

### Using other action

> If you need to use an action from the marketplace, please ensure that it is either an official action provided by GitHub, or you did a review of the actions code. In latter case, please ensure to use a version fixed by a full length commit SHA.

Reviewer: Can we add something like `This is important because the third party action could get hacked or add  malicious code on purpose to steal our secrets and thus get access to systems they shouldn't. We cannot trust third party actions.` 

I know we repeat it below as well but better to explain here too why this is important. If it's not clear why it's important it will be ignored. Or we move the sentence `If you need to use an action from the marketplace, please ensure that it is either an official action provided by GitHub, or you did a review of the actions code. In latter case, please ensure to use a version fixed by a full length commit SHA.` into the security section.

> 

Reviewer: We should also add something like

* Generally the best is to avoid using a third party GitHub action or script when possible. For example, when the action only executes few simple scripts. Then we won't need an action for this and can just do it ourselves thus reducing the security risk.

### Security

> There is a chance the action scripts getting hacked, paying attention to security is of the upmost importance when you create a new GitHub Action script. 

Reviewer: I believe this refers to the section above of using "Other github actions"? In that case it would need to have 4 hashes (`####`)? 

I didn't check out the links below so not sure if this should be two different security actions or if the entire security action refers to "Other Github actions"?

Author: @tsteur I believe `Using other action` and `Security` should be 2 different topics. security is more about injection I think, and `using other action` is just a warning about choosing the right marketplace actions.

Reviewer: 👍

It could lead a GitHub token lost and write access to our code. 【More details】(https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#stealing-the-jobs-github_token)

There are two common attack [script injection attacks](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/security-hardening-for-github-actions#example-of-a-script-injection-attack) and [Security hardening](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions).

For more details, refer [this article](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#overview)

#### Environment Variables
Please make the environment variables used in the action are not customizable by the PR title etc.

#### Sensitive Information
Do not save the secrets value like token, password or any sensitive information in plain text, JSON, XML, YAML (or similar).

### Permission

> We recommend using `none` permissions where every possible, `read` permissions if needed to read the value, `write` only if needed, for more details [Permission syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#permissions) and [Assigning permissions to jobs](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise-cloud@latest/actions/using-jobs/assigning-permissions-to-jobs) 

Reviewer: I think the `every` in `permissions where every possible` needs to go

---
category: DevelopInDepth

---
# Using GitHub Actions

> [Github Action](https://github.com/features/actions) makes it easy to automate all your software workflows, now with world-class CI/CD. Build, test, and deploy your code right from GitHub. Make code reviews, branch management, and issue triaging work the way you want.

Reviewer 2: This is still the claim copied from `https://github.com/features/actions`. I'm not sure if copying any content from other sites might cause legal problems as we claim the copyright in our license file. (ping @tsteur ) So we either need to mention where the text is copied from (if that is allowed at all) or use another text here that describes what we are using GitHub Actions for maybe.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Github Action](https://github.com/features/actions) are used to automate our software workflows including running javascript builds, test suites, releases and code checks.
```

## GitHub Action Scripts

> All the GitHub Action build file are locate in `.github/workflows/*.yml`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the GitHub Action build files are locate in `.github/workflows/*.yml`
```

Each script is triggered by its own conditions, for more details see [Github Action Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)

> Matomo uses GitHub Action to automatically run its build by various triggers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Matomo uses GitHub Action to automate some processes. Our current actions a listed below:
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Matomo uses GitHub Actions to automate some processes. Our current actions are listed below:
```

> - [Build Tracker JS] Trigger by the comment `build js` into the pull request. That will compress js/piwik.js into matomo.js and piwik.js

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Build Tracker JS] Triggered by the comment `build js` into the pull request. That will compress js/piwik.js into matomo.js and piwik.js and push the changes if PRs branch is within the same repo.
```

> - [Build VUE] Auto trigger, it will build VUE file and commit back to the PR

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Build VUE] Triggered for PRs when commits are pushed. It will build VUE files and commit back to the branch or leave a comment, if the branch is not within the same repo.
```

> - [Composer Update] Auto trigger by cron，it will run `composer update` and commit back to the repo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Composer Update] runs once a week. Executes `composer update` and creates a PR for available updates
```

> - [PHPCS check] Auto trigger, checking PHPCS code quality if not valid will return error details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PHPCS check] Triggered for pull requests. Checks code quality using PHPCS and will return error details on failure.
```

> - [Inactive PR] after 14 days, inactive PR will mark as state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Inactive PR] runs daily, inactive PR will be marked as stale after 14 days
```

> (New scripts should be documented in the list above.)

Reviewer 2: Actually there are a couple of scripts missing. We currently have 10 actions, but the list only contains 5.

Reviewer 3: This list looks good now, and we can add others later if needed

## Create a new GitHub Action script

> To create a new GitHub Action script please read [Quickstart for GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a new GitHub Action script please read [Quickstart for GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart).
```

We recommend forking the Matomo project and running actions on your own pipeline first. Also, please check the following list before getting started:

### Security

> There is a chance the action scripts getting hacked, paying attention to security is of the upmost importance when you create a new GitHub Action script. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a chance the action scripts are getting hacked, so paying attention to security is of the upmost importance when you create a new GitHub Action script. 
```

> It could lead a GitHub token lost and write access to our code. [More details](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#stealing-the-jobs-github_token)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It could lead to a GitHub token loss and write access to our code. [More details](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#stealing-the-jobs-github_token)
```

There are two common attack [script injection attacks](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/security-hardening-for-github-actions#example-of-a-script-injection-attack) and [Security hardening](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions).

For more details, refer [this article](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#overview)

#### Environment Variables

> Please make the environment variables used in the action are not customizable by the PR title etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please make sure the environment variables used in the action are not customizable by the PR title etc.
```

#### Sensitive Information

> Do not save the secrets value like token, password or any sensitive information in plain text, JSON, XML, YAML (or similar).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not save secrets with values like token, password or other sensitive information in plain text, JSON, XML, YAML (or similar).
```

### Third-party actions

> Generally the best practice is to avoid using a third party GitHub action or script when possible. For example, when the action only executes few simple scripts. Then we won't need an action for this and can just do it ourselves thus reducing the security risk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally the best practice is to avoid using a third party GitHub action or script when possible. For example, when the action only executes few simple scripts, then we won't need an action for this and can just do it ourselves thus reducing the security risk.
```

If you need to use an action from the marketplace, please ensure that it is either an official action provided by GitHub, or you did a review of the actions code. In latter case, please ensure to use a version fixed by a full length commit SHA.

### Permission

> We recommend using `none` permissions where possible, `read` permissions if needed to read the value, `write` only if needed, for more details [Permission syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#permissions) and [Assigning permissions to jobs](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise-cloud@latest/actions/using-jobs/assigning-permissions-to-jobs) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend using `none` permissions where possible, `read` permissions if needed to read the value, `write` only if needed, for more details see [Permission syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#permissions) and [Assigning permissions to jobs](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise-cloud@latest/actions/using-jobs/assigning-permissions-to-jobs) 
```

- [Follow up reviews] runs once a day. Once a PR inactive for 7 days with 'Need Review' label, Action will ping @matomo-org/core-reviewers.
- [Handle inactive PRs - closing message] runs once a day. Check if PR inactive for 35 days without 'Do not close' label, Action will ping @matomo-org/core-reviewers to check if we can close the PR.
- [Inactive PR] runs daily, inactive PR will be marked as stale after 14 days.
- [PHPCS check] Triggered for pull requests. Checks code quality using PHPCS and will return error details on failure.
- [Release] Release Matomo new version, the process require release password and version number.
- [Update Intl data] Create a PR for latest language updates. 
- [Update Submodules] Will do submodules update on Friday each week.
(New scripts should be documented in the list above.)

## Create a new GitHub Action script

To create a new GitHub Action script please read [Quickstart for GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart).

We recommend forking the Matomo project and running actions on your own pipeline first. Also, please check the following list before getting started:

### Security

> There is a chance the action scripts are getting hacked, so paying attention to security is of the upmost importance when you create a new GitHub Action script. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is a chance the action scripts are getting hacked, so paying attention to security is of the utmost importance when you create a new GitHub Action script. 
```

It could lead to a GitHub token loss and write access to our code. [More details](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#stealing-the-jobs-github_token)

> There are two common attack [script injection attacks](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/security-hardening-for-github-actions#example-of-a-script-injection-attack) and [Security hardening](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two common attacks - [script injection attacks](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/security-hardening-for-github-actions#example-of-a-script-injection-attack) and [Security hardening](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions).
```

> For more details, refer [this article](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#overview)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more details, refer to [this article](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#overview)
```

#### Environment Variables
Please make sure the environment variables used in the action are not customizable by the PR title etc.

#### Sensitive Information
Do not save secrets with values like token, password or other sensitive information in plain text, JSON, XML, YAML (or similar).

### Third-party actions

Generally the best practice is to avoid using a third party GitHub action or script when possible. For example, when the action only executes few simple scripts, then we won't need an action for this and can just do it ourselves thus reducing the security risk.

If you need to use an action from the marketplace, please ensure that it is either an official action provided by GitHub, or you did a review of the actions code. In latter case, please ensure to use a version fixed by a full length commit SHA.

### Permission

> We recommend using `none` permissions where possible, `read` permissions if needed to read the value, `write` only if needed, for more details see [Permission syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#permissions) and [Assigning permissions to jobs](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise-cloud@latest/actions/using-jobs/assigning-permissions-to-jobs) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We recommend using `none` permissions where possible, `read` permissions if needed to read the value, `write` only if needed. For more details see [Permission syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#permissions) and [Assigning permissions to jobs](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise-cloud@latest/actions/using-jobs/assigning-permissions-to-jobs) 
```
